# STP
## IEEE 802.1D STP
### Port States and Roles
802.1D STP Port States:
- **Disabled**: The port is in an administratively off position (that is, shut down)
- **Blocking**: The switch port is enabled, but the port is not forwarding any traffic to ensure that a loop is not created. The switch does not modify the MAC address table. It can only receive BPDUs from other switches.
- **Listening**: The switch port has transitioned from a blocking state and can now send or receive BPDUs. It cannot forward any other network traffic. The duration of the state correlates to the STP forwarding time. The next port state is learning.
- **Learning**: The switch port can now modify the MAC address table with any network traffic that it receives. The switch still does not forward any other network traffic besides BPDUs. The duration of the state correlates to the STP forwarding time.
The next port state is forwarding.
- **Forwarding**: The switch port can forward all network traffic and can update the MAC address table as expected. This is the final state for a switch port to forward network traffic.
- **Broken**: The switch has detected a configuration or an operational problem on a port that can have major effects. The port discards packets as long as the problem continues to exist.

802.1D Port Roles:
- **Root port (RP)**
- **Designated port (DP)**
- **Blocking port**
### Root Bridge Election
The first step with STP is to identify the root bridge. As a switch initializes, it assumes that it is the root bridge and uses the local bridge identifier as the root bridge identifier. It then listens to its neighbor’s configuration BPDU and does the following:
- If the neighbor’s configuration BPDU is inferior to its own BPDU, the switch ignores that BPDU.
- If the neighbor’s configuration BPDU is preferred to its own BPDU, the switch updates its BPDUs to include the new root bridge identifier along with a new root path cost that correlates to the total path cost to reach the new root bridge.

STP deems a switch more preferable if the priority in the bridge identifier is lower than the priority of the other switch’s configuration BPDUs. If the priority is the same, then the switch prefers the BPDU with the lower system MAC.

The priority in the configuration BPDU packets is actually the priority plus the value of the sys-id-ext (which is the VLAN number).

As the BPDU is received, the local root path cost is the advertised root path cost plus the local interface port cost. The root path cost is always zero on the root bridge.

### Locating Root Ports
After the switches have identified the root bridge, they must determine their root port (RP).
The switch compares the BPDU information to identify the RP. The RP is selected using the following logic:
1. The interface associated to lowest path cost is more preferred.
2. The interface associated to the lowest system priority of the advertising switch is
preferred next.
3. The interface associated to the lowest system MAC address of the advertising switch is preferred next.
4. When multiple links are associated to the same switch, the lowest port priority from the advertising switch is preferred.
5. When multiple links are associated to the same switch, the lower port number from the advertising switch is preferred.

>#show spanning-tree root
>
>The root bridge can be identified for a specific VLAN through the use of the command show spanning-tree root and examination of the CDP or LLDP neighbor information to identify the host name of the RP switch. The process can be repeated until the root bridge is located.

### Locating Blocked Designated Switch Ports
The logic to calculate which ports should be blocked between two non-root switches is as follows:
1. The interface is a designated port and must not be considered an RP.
2. The switch with the lower path cost to the root bridge forwards packets, and the one
with the higher path cost blocks.
3. The system priority of the local switch is compared to the system priority of the remote switch. The local port is moved to a blocking state if the remote system priority is lower than that of the local switch.
4. The system MAC address of the local switch is compared to the system priority of the remote switch. The local designated port is moved to a blocking state if the remote system MAC address is lower than that of the local switch.

>#show spanning-tree [vlan vlan-id] ! provides useful information for locating a port’s STP state.

These port types are expected on Catalyst switches:
- **Point-to-point (P2P):** This port type connects with another network device (PC or RSTP switch).
- **P2P edge:** This port type specifies that portfast is enabled on this port.
- ***TYPE_Inc:** This indicates a port configuration mismatch between this Catalyst switch and the switch it is connected to. (For example: the port mode access versus trunk being misconfigured)

>#show spanning-tree interface interface-id [detail] ! This command can be a daunting task for trunk ports that carry multiple VLANs. The output includes the STP state for every VLAN on an interface for every switch interface.

### STP Topology Changes
The switch that detects a link status change sends a topology change notification (TCN) BPDU toward the root bridge, out its RP. If an upstream switch receives the TCN, it sends out an acknowledgment and forwards the TCN out its RP to the root bridge.

Upon receipt of the TCN, the root bridge creates a new configuration BPDU with the Topology Change flag set, and it is then flooded to all the switches. When a switch receives a configuration BPDU with the Topology Change flag set, all switches change their MAC address timer to the forwarding delay timer (with a default of 15 seconds). This flushes out MAC addresses for devices that have not communicated in that 15-second window.

>#show spanning-tree [vlan vlan-id] detail ! The output of this command shows the topology change count and time since the last change has occurred

## RSTP (802.1W)
### Port States and Roles
RSTP (802.1W) reduces the number of port states to three:
- **Discarding**: The switch port is enabled, but the port is not forwarding any traffic to ensure that a loop is not created. This state combines the traditional STP states disabled, blocking, and listening.
- **Learning**: The switch port modifies the MAC address table with any network traffic it receives. The switch still does not forward any other network traffic besides BPDUs.
- **Forwarding**: The switch port forwards all network traffic and updates the MAC address table as expected. This is the final state for a switch port to forward network traffic.

RSTP (802.1W) Port Roles:
- **Root port (RP)**
- **Designated port (DP)**: A network port that receives and forwards frames to other switches. Designated ports provide connectivity to downstream devices and switches. There should be only one active designated port on a link.
- **Alternate port**: A network port that provides alternate connectivity toward the root switch through a different switch.
- **Backup port**: A network port that provides link redundancy toward the current root switch. The backup port cannot guarantee connectivity to the root bridge in the event that the upstream switch fails. A backup port exists only when multiple links connect between the same switches.

RSTP (802.1W) Port Types:
- **Edge port**: A port at the edge of the network where hosts connect to the Layer 2 topology with one interface and cannot form a loop. These ports directly correlate to ports that have the STP portfast feature enabled.
- **Root port**: A port that has the best path cost toward the root bridge. There can be only one root port on a switch.
- **Point-to-point port**: Any port that connects to another RSTP switch with full duplex. Full-duplex links do not permit more than two devices on a network segment, so determining whether a link is full duplex is the fastest way to check the feasibility of being connected to a switch.

